Gravitational Lensing

Wikipedia
One of the predicitons of Albert Einstein's theory of relativity
Johann Georg von Soldner pointed out the Newtonian gravity predicts starlight will bend arround massive object
the first observation of light deflection was performed by noting the stars as they passed the sum
It was done during a solar eclipse to see the star arround the sun
Becasue Spacetime is curved arround massive objects
Can either be from one sourc or a whole galaxy can bend the light arround itself
The first discovery of lensing was in 1979 and became known as Twin QSO discovered by Denis Walsh, Bob Carswell and Ray Weymann
at the Kitt Peak National Observatory

Three types of lensing, strong where there is clear distortion usch as rings, arches, and multiple images.
Weak lensing is when it can be 
Microlensing: no distortion in shaoe can be seen but the ligth recieved from the background object changes in time
Spacetime is curved arround massive balck holes
Einstein said you could observe multiple images from the same source
Angle of curvature is exressed by 4GM/rc^2
Cosmic Lens All Sky Survey went out looking for lensing systems and found 22
Another Survey was done in the southern hemisphere using the Austrailia 20 GHz Telescope
Einstiens Cross is when four images all appear

Solargravitational lensing 
Albert einstein predicted in 1936 that one could use gravitational lens at 542 AU could be used to magnify the image of objects
very far away


Introduction
Bending Light.  While the it sounds like something out of a science finction movie, it is a reality.  Unfortantly it might
not be as easy as one would wish it to be.  As we dive into the subject it is important to remember that their is
still so much that we don't know about the universe and the laws of physics. But I will ot the best of my ability try to
explain everything that the scientific community knows about this phenomenom. To start we will go into the history of the
gravatational lensing and its discovery.  Then we will go into the science behind it as well as what efforts are going on to find
lens.

While Einstein's theory of relativity is given the most credit for coming up with the idea of gravitation lensing, Johann Georg von Soldner
predicted that light can be bent arround massive objects before him. When testing out Enisteins theory by using a solar eclipse to look at
starlight that is very close to the sun, Aurthur Eddington was able to prove light deflection was possiable,  Einstein also was the one to theorize that you could potentially see two images of the same object as light was
bended arround it. Einstein, however never considered the possibility that light could be bent by a whole galaxy and just
a single star.  Fritz Zwicky was the first to consider this possibility in 1937 but it was unitl 1979 that the first gravitational
lens was discovered by a team of scientist at the Kitt Peak National Observatory.  This discovery, initially thought to be two 
identical objects is known as the Twin QSO.

Essentially lensing works much like any of situation involving gravity.  Given that all matter is actually stored energy the
equations of how gravity effects a object with mass it can be made so it effects energy, which is what light is.  So iy you where 
to shoot a bullet on earth the gravity would curve the bullet towards the ground until it eventually hit the earth.  However 
if you were really far above the earth and shot the bullet the gravity would change the trajectory of the bullet but would not hit
the ground.  This is what essentialy a gravitational lens does works, however you can get multiple images from one obeject becasue the light
goes out in all direction thus the image can be bent arround an object and come back on both sides.  However the object
effecting the light has to be incrediably massive. The equation to find the angle of deflection is (4GM)/(rc^2) where G is 
the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the object, r is the radius from the center of gravity, and c is the speed of light.  So you can immagine how massive
an object would have to be in order to casue any type of lensing. 

Unitl recently, most discoveries of gravitational lens where on accident and where not actively getting hunted down in the cosmos.
Recently, there has been two surveys one in the nothern hemisphere and one in the southern hemisphere to find gravitational lenses.
One one in the northern hemisphere was called the Cosmic Lens All Sky Survey or CLASS, this survey found 22 gravitational lenses
by detecting radion signals with Very Large Array.  The other survey was done in Australia at the the Australian Telescope Compact
Array where the scientist there looked for gravatational lenses near quasars. While radio waves were used to find the lens in the last two surveys 
the Hubble Telescope has also found gravational lenses including the furthest know lens from us.  

In Conclusion, Gravitation Lens were first theorized before Einstein but it was proven using his theories. But it wasnt until more
than 50 years after that one was actually discovered.  Working much like gravity on object with mass light will bend arround massive
objects but it must be incrediably massive such as a black hole or a galaxy.  There is a lot of effort going on right now to 
discover more graviatational lenses by using radio frequencies and looking for arcs and double images.  I believe there is still much
work to be done in the discovery of gravitation lens and can help us better understand our universe. 




